the Royal
on a hot day it's lovely just stand in
front of a fan all that nice cool air
being blown around ah that's much better
I bet you didn't know that this fans got
something in common with some types of
aircraft
can you guess what propeller
hits a palace on some aircraft and the
blades of the fan work in a similar way
although the propellers on planes aren't
there to cool you down it can all sure
what's repeller is it's basically a
number of blades join together in the
center actually on the front or the
wings of an aircraft it can be hard to
see them when they're spinning they just
look like a brother
slow things down and take a closer look
it all starts with the engine this
planes about to get going the pilot is
turning the ignition the engine is
filled with air and burns the fuel to
release energy the heated gas moves a
piston and the Pistons attached to a
crankshaft if you're not sure what a
crankshaft is it's just something
mechanical that spins around the
propeller is attached to the crankshaft
and at the engine run propeller spins
faster and faster and this makes the
aircraft move forward so how does a
spinning fan get this aircraft moving
it's all to do with something called
rust rust is what makes things well go
the wind moving past the blades creates
pressure that pushes the plane forward
propeller blades look a bit like wings
and that's not a coincidence
wings use the same science to give the
aircraft lift to get off the ground up
and away propeller blades often a sort
of twisty shape why do it the middle
than they are at the tip the shape is
very important think about the last time
you played on a playground roundabout if
you stand in the middle you don't go
that fast but if you're the one pushing
around the edge
you really have to run don't you guys go
around in a circle but the one pushing
has to go purga run faster much harder
work the center the propeller travels
less quickly than the tips so it has to
be larger to catch more air the cool
thing about propellers is that they're a
massive part of aircraft history from
the very earliest planes the Wright
brothers were famous aircraft inventors
who were amongst the first to build
planes that could take to the air and
stay there whilst their planes might
look quite old-fashioned the propellers
they use didn't look that different to
the ones you find on aircraft today now
they didn't have all the modern
materials that we have and they couldn't
use too much metal in their aircraft it
was just too heavy so any idea what they
made the propellers outer
that's my word the palace would have
been pieces of hardware like mahogany
community cherry
they were often very long up to eight
feet as time went on propellers became
more likely to be made a metal in the
Second World War or the famous aircraft
had propellers and has found two
propellers humming the team is
well-known as the aircraft
one of the most famous plays of all time
these days most smaller aircraft use
propellers the planes that carried loads
of passengers or fast military aircraft
are likely to have jet engines they're a
lot more powerful
- but repellers are so handy you find
similar things in all sorts of places on
boats airships and even on fans that
keep you cool - a supply see you soon
and chops away